1. The Tricolon (U+205D: ⁝)
The Tricolon is essentially a "triple colon"—three vertically aligned dots. 
Rhetorical Origin: Historically, it was used to visually separate a "tricolon," which is a rhetorical structure consisting of three parallel clauses or phrases (e.g., "I came, I saw, I conquered"). It provided a pause stronger than a comma but distinct from a full period.
Acrophonic Symbol: It is also known as the Epidaurean acrophonic symbol three, used in ancient Greek inscriptions to represent the number three.
Modern Analogue: In modern typography, its function has been replaced by the semicolon or standard colon, though it is still used by linguists and historians to mark ancient text structures. 
2. The Five Dot Punctuation (U+2059: ⁙)
This symbol is arranged like a quincunx (the "5" on a standard die)—four dots forming a square with a fifth dot in the center.
Lexicography (Ditto Mark): Its primary modern-historical use is in dictionaries and glossaries. It acts as a specialized shorthand to signal the repetition of a headword or a significant part of it, effectively serving as a space-saving "ditto mark".
The Pentonkion: In ancient contexts, it served as the pentonkion, a symbol for five ounces (a 5-ounce silver coin).
Editorial Annotation: Like the related four-dot punctuation (⁘), it belongs to a family of marks used in obelism—the practice of annotating or "blue-penciling" manuscripts to indicate corrections, deletions, or spurious text. 
Quora
Quora
 +3
Practical Use in your UI
Because these characters are "Other Punctuation" and rarely used, they make excellent, high-contrast delimiters for a terminal status bar where standard colons or pipes (|) might get lost in the data. 
Symbol 	Character	Unicode	Use Case for UMRS
Tricolon	⁝	U+205D	A "Heavy Divider" between major audit sections.
Five Dot	⁙	U+2059	A "Ditto" indicator for repeated MLS levels or types.
Dotted Cross	⁜	U+205C	A specialized "Target" or "Alert" marker.

In historical Greek and early Latin manuscripts, the Tricolon (⁝) was a "strength" marker for pauses. It was used to divide a sentence into three equal or parallel parts, creating a rhythmic, balanced cadence.
If we were to translate its classical use into a modern sentence, it acts like a super-semicolon that signals a perfectly balanced three-part thought.
1. The Classical Rhetorical Example
"The general's legacy was built on three pillars ⁝ he planned with cold logic ⁝ he fought with iron will ⁝ and he ruled with absolute mercy."
2. The Lexicographical (Dictionary) Example
In old European dictionaries, it was often used as a Syllable or Segment Divider to show how a word was constructed without using a hyphen:
"PRO ⁝ GRAM ⁝ MATIC"
3. The "Auditor's" Use Case (UMRS Logic)
For your high-assurance terminal cleanup, the Tricolon is a perfect "Heavy Separator" to distinguish between the Identity, Integrity, and Security blocks of your directory listing. It looks far more professional than a pipe (|) or a standard colon (:).
Example in your ls_ha tool:
text
MODE         OWNER:GROUP ⁝ PROV ⁝ SELINUX TYPE        MLS LEVEL
drwxr-xr-x   root:root   ⁝ IAV  ⁝ etc_t               SystemLow
Use code with caution.

Why use U+205D (⁝) over :?
Visual Weight: Standard colons are "light" and often get lost next to letters like i or l. The Tricolon has 50% more vertical density, making the column break unmistakable.
Audit Distinction: In a log full of timestamps (which use :) and file paths, the Tricolon stands out as a structural boundary, not a data value.
Zsh/Terminal Tip
To see how it looks in your current shell:
echo -e "IDENTITY \u205D PROVENANCE \u205D SECURITY"


